=========================================================================
Supplemental Terms for OpenUSD Technical Proposals ("Supplemental Terms")
=========================================================================

By and in consideration for using Pixar's OpenUSD proposals site, providing 
Technical Proposals to Pixar for Pixar's OpenUSD project, or by clicking a box 
that states that You accept or agree to these terms, You signify Your agreement 
to these Supplemental Terms for OpenUSD Technical Proposals. 

You hereby grant to Pixar and our licensees, distributors, agents, 
representatives and other authorized users, a perpetual, non-exclusive, 
irrevocable, fully-paid, royalty-free, sub-licensable and transferable 
(in whole or part) worldwide license under all copyrights, trademarks, patents, 
trade secret rights, data rights, privacy and publicity rights and other 
proprietary rights You or Your affiliates now or hereafter own or control, to 
reproduce, transmit, display, exhibit, distribute, index, comment on, perform, 
create derivative works based upon, modify, make, use, sell, have made, import, 
and otherwise exploit in any manner, (a) Your Technical Proposals, (b) any 
combination of Your Technical Proposals and the materials of the projects 
conducted, managed or owned by Pixar, and (c) any implementations of (a) or (b); 
in each case, including in all media formats and channels now known or hereafter 
devised, for any and all purposes, including entertainment, research, news, 
advertising, promotional, marketing, publicity, trade or commercial purposes, 
all without further notice to You, with or without attribution, and without the 
requirement of any permission from or payment to You or any other person or 
entity.  

You represent that each of Your Technical Proposals is Your original creation, 
and that you have no reason to believe that the Your Technical Proposals 
misappropriate, infringe or otherwise violate any proprietary rights of any 
third party. You further represent that You are legally entitled to grant the 
above license. 

As used herein, "You" (or "Your") shall mean (a) you, together with (if any) 
(b) the individual or legal entity on behalf of which you are submitting 
Technical Proposals, and its affiliated legal entities (if any) holding 
proprietary rights in or covering the Technical Proposals.  

As used herein, "Technical Proposals" shall mean any materials, including but 
not limited to text, white papers, specifications, messages, technologies, 
ideas, concepts, suggestions, feedback, formats, software code, algorithms and 
structures, that are submitted or otherwise distributed to Pixar via Pixar's 
OpenUSD proposals site or any other OpenUSD related communications channel.

These Supplemental Terms are in addition to any prior, contemporaneous, or 
future agreement (and shall remain in effect notwithstanding any future 
agreement) that You may have with Pixar.

At any time, we may update these Supplemental Terms (including by modification, 
deletion and/or addition of any portion thereof). Any update to these 
Supplemental Terms will be effective thirty (30) calendar days following our 
posting of the updated Supplemental Terms to a Pixar site.

Updated March 4, 2024
