========================
Open Source Announcement
========================

.. include:: rolesAndUtils.rst
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Pixar Animation Studio's Universal Scene Description to be Open-Sourced
=======================================================================

Groundbreaking Software Enables Dramatically Increased Efficiency Across Workflows
**********************************************************************************

EMERYVILLE, California - August 10, 2015 - Pixar Animation Studios announced
today its intent to release its Universal Scene Description software (USD) as an
open-source project by summer 2016. USD addresses the ever-growing need in the
CG film and game industries for an effective way to describe, assemble,
interchange, and modify high-complexity virtual scenes between digital content
creation tools employed by studios.

The powerful techniques for composing and non-destructively editing graphics
"scene graphs" that form the core of USD have been evolving at Pixar for close
to 20 years, dating back to "A Bug's Life." These techniques, such as
file-referencing, layered overrides, variation, and inheritance, were completely
overhauled into a robust and uniform design for Pixar's next-generation
animation system, *Presto.* "USD is the marriage of *Presto* 's 'composition
engine' to lazy-access cached scene description, with top-to-bottom enhancements
for scalability and leverage of today's multi-core systems effectively," says
Sebastian Grassia, Lead Engineer for the USD project. Although it is still under
active development and optimization, USD has been in use for nearly a year in
the making of "Finding Dory," bringing new levels of performance and stability
to Pixar's production.

The open-source Alembic project brought standardization of cached geometry
interchange to the VFX industry; USD hopes to build on Alembic's success, taking
the next step of standardizing the "algebra" by which assets are aggregated and
refined in-context. Says Guido Quaroni, VP of Software R&D at Pixar, "One of the
key aspects of Pixar's pipeline is the ability for hundreds of artists to
operate simultaneously on the same collections of assets in different contexts,
using separate 'layers' of data that are composited together at various
production stages. USD generalizes these concepts in an attempt to make them
available to any DCC application."

The USD distribution will include embeddable direct 3D visualization provided by
Pixar's modern GPU renderer, *Hydra,* as well as plugins for several key VFX
DCCs, comprehensive documentation, tutorials, and complete python bindings.

Pixar has already been sharing early USD snapshots with a number of industry
vendors and studios for evaluation, feedback, and advance incorporation. Damien
Fagnou, Global Head of VFX Operations for MPC Film, relates, "USD is an amazing
opportunity for both software vendors and VFX companies; this type of common
open standard drives the industry to greater innovation by focusing development
and leveraging a wide community of artists and developers. We have been working
with Pixar to evaluate USD since the beginning of the year and plan to use it as
a key part of our future VFX pipeline."

Jeff Clifford, Head of R&D for Double Negative, states, "Over the past 12
months, Double Negative have converted many large environment assets from our
proprietary system over to USD for testing and more recently have been using the
USD viewer successfully in production.  Going forward we are hoping a dedicated
team can help test and develop USD to cater for all our scene description needs,
including our cross-studio collaborations."

Among the vendors helping to evaluate USD are The Foundry and Fabric
Software. Andy Lomas, Product Manager of Katana, says, "At The Foundry we
believe that USD will have a huge impact, and deserves to become an industry
standard similar to OpenEXR and OpenSubdiv. It is an ideal format for creating
rich assets that will work naturally with Katana, allowing workflows that were
previously only available to large studios using proprietary tools. We consider
that it is exactly what is needed to enable a scalable collaborative pipeline,
allowing the best in class tools to be used for each part of the production
process."

VP Product, Fabric Software, Kevin Tureski, states "USD perfectly complements
Fabric Engine by handling complex scene data in an application-agnostic
fashion. The design of the USD API made it straightforward for us to integrate
it directly into Fabric Engine and we already have customers testing the
combination."

More information about USD can be found at the official website: `openusd.org
<http://openusd.org>`_

:underline:`USD, Presto, and Hydra are trademarks of Pixar Animation Studios. 
All other trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners.`

About Pixar Animation Studios
*****************************

Pixar Animation Studios, a wholly owned subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company,
is an Academy Award\ |reg|-winning film studio with world-renowned technical,
creative and production capabilities in the art of computer animation. The
Northern California studio has created some of the most successful and beloved
animated films of all time, including "Toy Story," "Monsters, Inc.," "Cars,"
"The Incredibles," "Ratatouille," "WALL |middot| E," "Up," "Toy Story 3" and
"Brave." Its movies have won 30 Academy Awards\ |reg| and have grossed more 
than $8.7 billion at the worldwide box office to date. "Inside Out," Pixar's 
fifteenth feature, is currently in theaters worldwide.
