===================
Open Source Release
===================

.. include:: rolesAndUtils.rst
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Pixar Animation Studios Open Sources Universal Scene Description
================================================================

Tool Greatly Enhances Efficiency Across Complex Workflows
*********************************************************

EMERYVILLE, California - July 26, 2016 - Pixar Animation Studios announced today
the official open source release of Universal Scene Description (USD),
technology used for the interchange of 3D graphics data through various digital
content creation (DCC) tools. USD provides an effective and scalable solution
for the complex workflows of CG film and game industry studios.

"We believe that being open with our technology and sharing it with our peers in
the industry is how we can best continue to drive innovation," says Ed Catmull,
President, Pixar and Walt Disney Animation Studios. "It's in that spirit that
we're happy to be opening up USD."

With this initial release, Pixar is opening up its development process and
providing code used internally at the studio. "USD synthesizes years of
engineering aimed at integrating collaborative production workflows that demand
a constantly growing number of software packages," says Guido Quaroni, Vice
President of Software Research and Development at Pixar.

USD provides a rich and powerful toolset for reading, writing, editing, and
rapidly previewing 3D scene data. With many of its features geared towards
performance and large-scale collaboration among many artists, USD is ideal for
the complexities of the modern pipeline. One such feature is Hydra, a
high-performance preview renderer capable of interactively displaying large data
sets.

"With USD, Hydra, and OpenSubdiv, we're sharing core technologies that can be
used in filmmaking tools across the industry," says George ElKoura, Supervising
Lead Software Engineer at Pixar. "Our focus in developing these libraries is to
provide high-quality, high-performance software that can be used reliably under
demanding production scenarios."

"Integrating Hydra into our proprietary Virtual Production Renderer helped us
solve one of our biggest challenges," says Kevin Wooley, Virtual Production
Engineering Lead at ILM. "With the performance improvement, we can handle
incredibly complicated digital environments, with thousands of pieces of
geometry, while preserving the editability of the scene."

Along with USD and Hydra, the distribution ships with USD plugins for some
common DCCs, such as Autodesk's Maya and The Foundry's Katana.

We are committed to working with Pixar to make USD the platform-independent
scene representation of choice for Maya artists," says Marc Stevens, Vice
President of Film & Television, Autodesk.

"The Foundry strives to constantly deliver the best innovations to our customers
and one of the best ways we can do that is through our partners, so we were
delighted to work with Pixar on the release of USD," says Andy Whitmore, Chief
Product Officer at The Foundry. "This technology will ultimately give companies
better and more powerful pipelines by building more robust connections between
their tools of choice, resulting in more empowered artists and therefore greater
creativity."

To prepare for open sourcing their code, Pixar gathered feedback from various
studios and vendors to receive early testing from the community.

"In designing and refining USD's concepts and APIs, we've worked closely with
our own internal production clients, as well as with other studios, who have
already provided feedback that helped shape USD's evolution," says Sebastian
Grassia, USD Lead Engineer.

Studios such as MPC, Double Negative, ILM, and Animal Logic were among those who
provided valuable feedback in preparation for this release.

"USD provides a rich and powerful framework which allows us to describe our
pipeline in a scalable, coherent and flexible way. It brings conceptual clarity,
standardization and great potential for asset and software reuse to the world of
Animation and VFX," says Eoin Murphy, Lead Pipeline Developer, Animal Logic R&D.

More information about USD can be found at the official website: `openusd.org
<http://openusd.org>`_

:underline:`USD, Presto, and Hydra are trademarks of Pixar Animation Studios. 
All other trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners.`

About Pixar Animation Studios
*****************************

Pixar Animation Studios, a wholly owned subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company,
is an Academy Award\ |reg|-winning film studio with world-renowned technical, 
creative and production capabilities in the art of computer animation. The 
Northern California studio has created some of the most successful and beloved
animated films of all time, including "Toy Story," "Monsters, Inc.," "Cars," 
"The Incredibles," "Ratatouille," "WALL |middot| E," "Up," "Toy Story 3," 
"Brave," and "Inside Out." Its movies have won 31 Academy Awards\ |reg| and 
have grossed more than $10 billion at the worldwide box office to date. 
"Finding Dory," Pixar's 17th feature, opened on June 17, 2016 and earned the 
highest-grossing domestic box office of all-time for any animated film.
