===============================
UsdPreviewSurface Specification
===============================

.. include:: rolesAndUtils.rst
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

Copyright |copy| 2019, Pixar Animation Studios,  *version 2.4*

.. contents:: :local:

Goal
====

The goal of this proposal is to have a preview material with a basic set of
nodes that can be used to interchange assets from one platform to another in
film and game pipelines, and which are supported natively by the production
renderers that ship with USD/Hydra. The actual preview surface is intended to
provide a solution for most situations and to move assets across multiple
environments, the surface can work with metallic and specular workflows.

You will notice we have left out concepts like subsurface, anisotropic specular
highlights, cloth shaders, just to mention a few. For these cases, we recommend
creating a more specific surface. Our assessment is that the industry is
approaching a more flexible, non-ubersurface, style of describing surfaces, as
hinted by `NVIDIA's MDL
<https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/design-visualization/technologies/material-definition-language/>`_
, but that industry-wide adoption, especially for realtime game engines, is
still a ways off. We are excited for USD/UsdShade to support such efforts (and
UsdShade should already be fully capable of representing such shading networks).
But our goal with this proposal is to promote interchange in the industry
starting in 2018, thus this first version of a preview surface is a more
constrained ubersurface that reflects what is interchangeable around 2018.

Our starting requirements:

    * Rather than design a single node like the `Alembic Preview Material
      <https://github.com/alembic/alembic/wiki/Alembic-Preview-Material-Specification>`_
      , we wanted to design a preview surface that is friendly to network
      shading in UsdShade, so that for clients that can support it, any signal
      input to the surface could be driven by pattern networks. This guided us
      to design a "minimally complete" suite of four nodes to allow primvar and
      texture-driven inputs to the surface.

    ..

    * We wanted to ensure our design would promote reliable interchange between
      offline/real-time renderers and content creation tools. We examined a
      number of other specifications, and we believe the preview surface can
      match up reasonably well.

    ..

    * Although much of the game industry relies on the *metallic workflow* ,
      many packages also support the more expressive *specular workflow* ; given
      that several of the above-named applications support both in one form or
      another, and since we want to use this preview surface internally as well
      and use the specular workflow for our preview shading, we designed a
      surface that supports both workflows.

Core Nodes 
==========

Preview Surface
###############

The :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface` is meant to model a "modern" physically based
surface that strikes a balance between expressiveness and reliable interchange
between current day DCC's and game engines and other real-time rendering
clients. We expect it to eventually evolve in a versioned way, as the state of
the industry evolves.

This preview surface supports both "workflows", *specular* and *metalness*.

.. _straightAlphaPreviewSurface:

All color inputs to the :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface` are straight alpha (no
pre-multiplication).

In USD's high performance rasterizing renderer, Storm, we decided to
pre-multiply before lighting computations when opacity is authored. The current
architecture of Storm lets us handle most use cases correctly, except for the
case of a :usda:`diffuseColor` connected to the
:ref:`UsdUVTexture's<spec_usdpreviewsurface:texture reader>` :usda:`rgb` output of
a mipmapped 4-channel texture, and an :usda:`opacity` connected to a different
data source. This use-case is fairly uncommon in our studio, so we decided to
approximate the correct result, which will have both the texture's alpha and the
separate :usda:`opacity` pre-multiplied. Our recommendation using
:usda:`UsdPreviewSurface` with Storm is that if you must use a 4-channel
texture, then use that texture as a data source for both :usda:`diffuseColor`
and :usda:`opacity`.

**Node Id**: 

* :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface`

**Inputs (name - type - fallback)**

* **diffuseColor - color3f - (0.18, 0.18, 0.18)**

  When using metallic workflow this is interpreted as albedo.

* **emissiveColor - color3f - (0.0, 0.0, 0.0)**

  Emissive component.

* **useSpecularWorkflow - int - 0**

  This node can fundamentally operate in two modes : *Specular workflow* where
  you provide a texture/value to the :usda:`specularColor` input. Or, *Metallic
  workflow* where you provide a texture/value to the :usda:`metallic` input.
  Depending on the 0 or 1 value of this parameter, the following parameters are
  conditionally enabled:

  * :iu:`useSpecularWorkflow = 1: (Specular workflow)`

    * **specularColor - color3f - (0.0, 0.0, 0.0)** 
      
      Specular color to be used. This is the color at 0 incidence.  Edge color
      is assumed white. Transition between the two colors according to Schlick
      fresnel approximation.

  * :iu:`useSpecularWorkflow = 0: (Metalness workflow)`

.. _metalnessworkflowcalc:

    * **metallic - float - 0.0** 

      Use 1 for metallic surfaces and 0 for non-metallic.  - If metallic is 1,
      then both F0 (reflectivity at 0 degree incidence) and edge F90
      reflectivity will simply be the *Albedo* .  - If metallic is 0, then
      *Albedo* is ignored in the calculation of F0 and F90; F0 is derived from
      *ior* via :math:`((1-ior)/(1+ior))^2` and F90 is white. In between, we
      interpolate.

* **roughness - float - 0.5** 

  Roughness for the specular lobe. The value ranges from 0 to 1, which goes from
  a perfectly specular surface at 0.0 to maximum roughness of the specular lobe.
  This value is usually squared before use with a GGX or Beckmann lobe.  Note 
  that roughness applies **only** to the specular lobe, and the transmissive
  lobe (if any) always assumes roughness 0.0.

* **clearcoat - float - 0.0** 

  Second specular lobe amount. The color is white.

* **clearcoatRoughness - float - 0.01**

  Roughness for the second specular lobe.

* **opacity - float - 1.0** 

  When *opacity* is 1.0 then the gprim is fully opaque, if it is smaller than
  1.0 then the prim is translucent, when it is 0 the gprim is transparent. Note
  that even a fully transparent object still receives lighting as, for example,
  perfectly clear glass still has a specular response.

.. _addopacitythreshold:

* **opacityThreshold - float - 0.0** 

  The *opacityThreshold* input is useful for creating geometric cut-outs based
  on the *opacity* input. A value of 0.0 indicates that no masking is applied to
  the *opacity* input, while a value greater than 0.0 indicates that rendering
  of the surface is limited to the areas where the *opacity* is greater or equal
  to that value. A classic use of *opacityThreshold* is to create a leaf from an
  opacity input texture, in that case the threshold determines the parts of the
  opacity texture that will be fully transparent and not receive lighting. Note
  that when *opacityThreshold* is greater than zero, the *opacity* values less
  than the *opacityThreshold* will not be rendered, and the *opacity* values
  greater than or equal to the *opacityThreshold* will be fully visible.  Thus,
  the *opacityThreshold* serves as a switch for how the *opacity* input is
  interpreted; this "translucent or masked" behavior is common in engines and
  renderers, and makes the UsdPreviewSurface easier to interchange. It does
  imply, however, that it is not possible to faithfully recreate a
  glassy/translucent material that also provides an opacity-based mask... so no
  single-polygon glass leaves.

.. _updateior:

* **ior - float - 1.5** 

  Index of Refraction to be used for translucent objects and objects with
  specular components, including the clearcoat if :math:`clearcoat > 0`.

* **normal - normal3f - (0.0, 0.0, 1.0)** 

  Expects normal in tangent space [(-1,-1,-1), (1,1,1)]. This means your texture
  reader implementation should provide data to this node that is properly scaled
  and ready to be consumed as a tangent space normal.
  If the texture has 8 bits per component, then scale and bias must be adjusted 
  to be (2.0, 2.0, 2.0, 1.0) and (-1, -1, -1, 0) respectively in order to 
  satisfy tangent space requirements. Normal map data is commonly expected to be 
  linearly encoded. However, many image-writing tools automatically set the 
  profile of three-channel, 8-bit images to SRGB. To prevent an unwanted 
  transformation, the sourceColorSpace must also be set to "raw".

* **displacement - float - 0.0** 

  Displacement in the direction of the normal.

* **occlusion - float - 1.0** 

  Extra information about the occlusion of different parts of the mesh that this
  material is applied to. Occlusion only makes sense as a surface-varying
  signal, and pathtracers will likely choose to ignore it.  An occlusion value
  of 0.0 means the surface point is fully occluded by other parts of the
  surface, and a value of 1.0 means the surface point is completely unoccluded
  by other parts of the surface.

**Outputs (name - type)** 

In UsdShade, by convention and limitation of Usd/SdfLayer's native representable
types, we assign the :usda:`SdfValueTypeName` type :usda:`token` to all inputs
and outputs of "rich types" (e.g. structs), while allowing use of *renderType*
metadata (a string) on :cpp:`UsdShadeInput` and :cpp:`UsdShadeOutput` to carry
typeName information that may be useful to a renderer or shading system.

  * **surface - token** 

  * **displacement - token** 

.. code-block:: usda

   def Shader "UsdPreviewSurface" (
       doc = "Preview surface specification"
       sdrMetadata = {
          token role = "surface"
       }
   )
   {
       uniform token info:id = "UsdPreviewSurface"
   
       # Outputs
       token outputs:surface
       token outputs:displacement
    
       # Inputs
       color3f inputs:diffuseColor = (0.18, 0.18, 0.18) (
           doc = """Parameter used as diffuseColor when using the specular
                    workflow, when using metallic workflow this is interpreted
                    as albedo."""
       )
   
       color3f inputs:emissiveColor = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0) (
           doc = """Emissive component."""
       )
   
       int inputs:useSpecularWorkflow = 0 (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """This node can fundamentally operate in two modes :
               Specular workflow where you provide a texture/value to the
               "specularColor" input. Or, Metallic workflow where you
               provide a texture/value to the "metallic" input."""
       )
    
       color3f inputs:specularColor = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0) (
           doc = """Used only in the specular workflow.
                Specular color to be used.
                This is the color at 0 incidence. Edge color is assumed white.
                Transition between the two colors according to Schlick fresnel 
                approximation."""
       )
    
       float inputs:metallic = 0.0 (
           doc = """Used only in the metalness workflow.
               1 for metallic surfaces and 0 for non-metallic.
   			- If metallic is 1, then both F0 (reflectivity at 0 degree incidence) 
   			and edge F90 reflectivity will simply be the Albedo.
   			- If metallic is 0, then Albedo is ignored in the calculation of F0 
   			and F90; F0 is derived from ior via ( (1-ior)/(1+ior) )^2 and F90 is white. 
   			In between, we interpolate."""
       )
    
       float inputs:roughness = 0.5 (
           doc = """Roughness for the specular lobe. The value ranges from 0 to 1, 
           which goes from a perfectly specular surface at 0.0 to maximum roughness 
           of the specular lobe. This value is usually squared before use with a 
           GGX or Beckmann lobe."""
       )
    
       float inputs:clearcoat = 0.0 (
           doc = """Second specular lobe amount. The color is white."""
       )
    
       float inputs:clearcoatRoughness = 0.01 (
           doc = """Roughness for the second specular lobe."""
       )
    
       float inputs:opacity = 1.0 (
           doc = """Opacity of the material."""
       )
   
   
       float inputs:opacityThreshold = 0.0 (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Threshold used to determine opacity values that will be 
   		considered fully transparent. A value of 0.0 indicates that no masking 
   		is applied to the opacity input, while a value greater than 0.0 indicates 
   		that rendering of the surface is limited to the areas where the opacity 
   		is greater or equal to that value. Note that when opacityThreshold is 
   		greater than zero, the opacity values less than the opacityThreshold will 
   		not be rendered, and the opacity values greater than or equal to the 
   		opacityThreshold will be fully visible."""
       )
   
       float inputs:ior = 1.5 (
           doc = """Index of Refraction to be used for translucent objects and 
   				 objects with specular components, including the clearcoat
                    if clearcoat > 0."""
       )
   
       normal3f inputs:normal = (0.0, 0.0, 1.0) (
           doc = """Expects normal in tangent space [(-1,-1,-1), (1,1,1)]
               This means your texture reader implementation should provide
               data to this node that is properly scaled and ready
               to be consumed as a tangent space normal.
               If the texture has 8 bits per component, then scale and bias 
               must be adjusted to be (2.0, 2.0, 2.0, 1.0) and (-1, -1, -1, 0) 
               respectively in order to satisfy tangent space requirements. 
               Normal map data is commonly expected to be linearly encoded. 
               However, many image-writing tools automatically set the profile 
               of three-channel, 8-bit images to SRGB. To prevent an unwanted 
               transformation, the sourceColorSpace must also be set to "raw".
               """
       )
   
       float inputs:displacement = 0.0 (
           doc = """Displacement in the direction of the normal. """
       )
   
       float inputs:occlusion = 1.0 (
           doc = """Occlusion signal. This provides extra information about the 
           occlusion of different parts of the mesh that this material is applied 
           to.  Occlusion only makes sense as a surface-varying signal, and 
           pathtracers will likely choose to ignore it.  An occlusion value of 0.0 
           means the surface point is fully occluded by other parts of the surface, 
           and a value of 1.0 means the surface point is completely unoccluded by 
           other parts of the surface. """
       )
   }

Texture Reader 
##############

Node that can be used to read UV textures, including tiled textures such as Mari
UDIM's.

.. note:: UDIM Tiling Constraints
   
   To keep interchange simple(r) and to aid in efficient processing of UDIM
   textures:
   
   * **We stipulate a maximum of ten tiles in the U direction**
   * **We stipulate that the tiles must be within the range [1001, 1099]**


**Node Id**: 

* :usda:`UsdUVTexture`

**Inputs (name - type - fallback)**

* **file - asset - <EMPTY STRING>** 
  
  Path to the texture. Following the 1.36 MaterialX spec, Mari UDIM substitution
  in *file* values uses the "<UDIM>" token, so for example in USD, we might see
  a value :filename:`@textures/occlusion.<UDIM>.tex@`

* **st - float2 - (0.0, 0.0)** 

  Texture coordinate to use to fetch this texture. This node defines a
  mathematical/cartesian mapping from st to uv to image space: the (0, 0) *st*
  coordinate maps to a (0, 0) *uv* coordinate that samples the **lower-left-hand
  corner** of the texture image, as viewed on a monitor, while the (1, 1) *st*
  coordinate maps to a (1, 1) *uv* coordinate that samples the
  **upper-right-hand corner** of the texture image, as viewed on a monitor. See
  :ref:`spec_usdpreviewsurface:texture coordinate orientation in usd` for more
  details.

* **wrapS - token - useMetadata** 

  Wrap mode when reading this texture.Possible Values:

    * *black* : Reader returns black outside unit square

    * *clamp* : extend edge values outside unit square

    * *repeat* : repeat texture outside unit square

    * *mirror* : flip and repeat texture outside unit square

    * *useMetadata* : look for **wrapS** and **wrapT** metadata in the texture
      file itself, that are expected to be string-valued fields whose value is
      one of *black, clamp, repeat,* or *mirror* . If the texture contains no
      such metadata, then fall back to ***black* .** If a texture format (such
      as Pixar *tex* files) already have their own conventions for storing this
      data, it is the responsibility of the texture loader implementation to
      translate to the expected values enumerated here.

* **wrapT - token - useMetadata** 

  Wrap mode when reading this texture. Same options and caveats as wrapS.

* **fallback - float4 - (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0)** 

  Fallback value used when texture can not be read.

* **scale - float4 - (1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0)** 

  Scale to be applied to all components of the texture. 

    :math:`output = textureValue * scale + bias`

* **bias - float4 - (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)** 

  Bias to be applied to all components of the texture. 

    :math:`output = textureValue * scale + bias`

.. _addsourcecolorspace:

* **sourceColorSpace - token - auto** 

  Flag indicating the color space in which the source texture is encoded.
  Possible Values:

    * *raw* : Use texture data as it was read from the texture and do not mark
      it as using a specific color space.

    * *sRGB* : Mark texture as sRGB when reading. The texture will be read using
      the sRGB transfer curve, but not filtered against the sRGB gamut. 

    * *auto* : Check for gamma/color space metadata in the texture file itself;
      if metadata is indicative of sRGB, mark texture as *sRGB* . If no relevant
      metadata is found, mark texture as *sRGB* if it is either 8-bit and has 3
      channels or if it is 8-bit and has 4 channels. Otherwise, do not mark
      texture as *sRGB* and use texture data as it was read from the texture.

**Outputs**

.. _eliminatergba:

  * **r - float, g - float, b - float, a - float, rgb - float3** 

    Outputs one or more values. If the texture is 8 bit per component [0, 255]
    values will first be converted to floating point [0, 1] and apply any
    transformations (bias, scale) indicated. Otherwise it will just apply any
    transformation (bias, scale). If a single-channel texture is fed into a
    :usda:`UsdUVTexture`, the **r, g** , and **b** components of the **rgb**
    output will repeat the channel's value, while the single **a** output will
    be set to 1.0.  If a two-channel texture is fed into a UsdUVTexture, the
    **r, g** , and **b** components of the **rgb** output will repeat the first
    channel's value, while the single **a** output will be set to the second
    channel's value.

.. code-block:: usda

   def Shader "UsdUVTexture" (
       doc = """Texture Node Specification represents a node that can be used to 
       read UV textures, including tiled textures such as Mari UDIM's.
       
       Reads from a texture file and outputs one or more values. If the texture has 
       8 bits per component, [0, 255] values will first be converted to floating 
       point in the range [0, 1] and then any transformations (bias, scale) 
       indicated  are applied. Otherwise any indicated transformation (bias, 
       scale) is just applied. 
       If a single-channel texture is fed into a UsdUVTexture, the r, g, and b 
       components of the rgb output will repeat the channel's value, 
       while the single 'a' output will be set to 1.0.
       If a two-channel texture is fed into a UsdUVTexture, the r, g, and b 
       components of the rgb output will repeat the first channel's value,
       while the single 'a' output will be set to the second channel's value.
       If a three-channel texture is fed into a UsdUVTexture, the r, g, and b 
       components of the rgb outputs will contain the assigned texture 
       channel's value, while the single 'a' output will be set to 1.0.
   """
       sdrMetadata = {
           token role = "texture"
       }
   )
   {
       uniform token info:id = "UsdUVTexture"
   
       asset inputs:file = @@ (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Path to the texture this node uses."""
       )
   
       float2 inputs:st (
           doc = """This input provides the texture coordinates. It is usually 
                   connected to a (primvar) node that will provide the texture 
                   coords."""
       )
   
       token inputs:wrapS = "useMetadata" (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """<options> black, clamp, repeat, mirror, useMetadata."""
       )
   
       token inputs:wrapT = "useMetadata" (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """<options> black, clamp, repeat, mirror, useMetadata."""
       )
   
       float4 inputs:fallback = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0) (
           doc = """Fallback value to be used when no texture is connected."""
           sdrMetadata = {
               token defaultInput = "1"
           }
       )
   
       float4 inputs:scale = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0) (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Scale to be applied to all components of the texture. 
                    value * scale + bias"""
       )
   
       float4 inputs:bias = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0) (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"        
           doc = """Bias to be applied to all components of the texture. 
                    value * scale + bias"""
       )
   
       token inputs:sourceColorSpace = "auto" (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """<options> raw, sRGB, auto. Flag indicating the color 
   		space in which the source texture is encoded."""
       )
   
       float outputs:r ( 
           doc = "Outputs the red channel."
       )
   
       float outputs:g (
           doc = "Outputs the green channel."
       )
   
       float outputs:b (
           doc = "Outputs the blue channel."
       )
   
       float outputs:a (
           doc = "Outputs the alpha channel."
       )

       float3 outputs:rgb (
           doc = """Outputs the red, green and blue channels, or x,y,z data 
                    for a normal-map read from a texture."""
       )
   }

Primvar Reader
##############

The Primvar Reader node provides the ability for shading networks to consume
(potentially) surface-varying data defined on geometry (:ref:`UsdGeomPrimvars
<glossary:Primvar>`), including texture coordinates. In contrast to the
:usda:`UsdUVTexture` node, which has a fixed set of "common" outputs, more than
one of which may be consumed in a shading network, we feel the Primvar reader
node is more clearly represented as a "variably typed" node, where its type is
determined by the type of the primvar data it consumes from the geometry. By
convention, for nodes with variable typed inputs/outputs, we include that
information in the :usda:`info:id` name to make sure we have a unique identifier
for each implementation. We present the :usda:`float2` instantiation, with the
other allowable instantiations being :usda:`float`, :usda:`float3`,
:usda:`float4`, :usda:`int`, :usda:`string`, :usda:`normal`, :usda:`point`,
:usda:`vector`, :usda:`matrix`. The underlying datatype for :usda:`normal`,
:usda:`point`, and :usda:`vector` is :usda:`float3`, and the underlying type for
:usda:`matrix` is :usda:`matrix4d`. Note that *color* is not one of the types;
we elide it for two reasons:

    #. No special processing is required by the node or renderer based on the
       knowledge of a primvar having the *color* role.

    #. Some shading systems and renderers assume that *color* implies *color3f*. 
       We would like to make it as easy as possible to serve and connect 
       4-channel colors as well as 3-channel. Any primvar whose 
       :usda:`SdfValueType` in USD is :usda:`color3f` or :usda:`float3` will 
       successfully bind to a Primvar Reader of the :usda:`float3` type, and any 
       primvar whose :usda:`SdfValueType` in USD is :usda:`color4f` or 
       :usda:`float4` will successfully bind to a Primvar Reader of the 
       :usda:`float4` type.

:bu:`Templated Definition for UsdPrimvarReader <TYPE>`

**Node Id**: 

* :usda:`UsdPrimvarReader_TYPE`

**Inputs**

.. _varnamefromtokentostring:

* **varname - string - <EMPTY string>** 

  Name of the primvar to be read from the mesh

* **fallback - TYPE** 

  fallback value to be returned if geometry fetch failed.

**Outputs**

* **result - TYPE** 

  Result of the geometry fetch. When the :usda:`UsdPrimvarReader` node is used
  to fetch color data from a mesh, this data is assumed to be ready for
  consumption by the :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface` node. There is no need to
  consider pre-multiplication.

Here, for example, is the :usda:`float2` variant:

**Node Id**: 

* :usda:`UsdPrimvarReader_float2`

**Inputs (name - type - fallback)**

* **varname - string - <EMPTY string>** 
          
  Name of the primvar to be read from the mesh

* **fallback - float2 - (0.0, 0.0)** 
          
  fallback value to be returned if geometry fetch failed.

**Outputs**

* **result - float2** 

  Result of the geometry fetch

.. code-block:: usda

   class "UsdPrimvarReader" (
       sdrMetadata = {
           token role = "primvar"
       }
   )
   {
       string inputs:varname  (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Name of the primvar to be fetched from the geometry."""
           sdrMetadata = {
               token primvarProperty = "1"
           }
       )    
   }
   
   def Shader "UsdPrimvarReader_float2" (
       inherits = </UsdPrimvarReader>
   )
   {
       uniform token info:id = "UsdPrimvarReader_float2"
   
       float2 inputs:fallback = (0.0, 0.0) (
           doc = """Fallback value to be returned when fetch failed."""
           sdrMetadata = {
               token defaultInput = "1"
           }
       )
   
       float2 outputs:result
   }

Transform2d
###########

Node that takes a 2d input and applies an affine transformation to it. This is
especially useful for transforming 2d texture coordinates, which corresponds to:

    * the 2D subset of the MDL `rotation_translation_scale
      <http://raytracing-docs.nvidia.com/mdl/base_module/index.html#base#>`_
      function

    ..

    * the `glTF KHR_texture_transform extension
      <https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glTF/tree/main/extensions/2.0/Khronos/KHR_texture_transform>`_ -
      modulo glTF's use of radians rather than degrees, and the already-noted
      inverted texture coordinate system in glTF

    ..

    * A Nodegraph in MaterialX consisting of a chain of **vector2** versions of
      **multiply, rotate, add** nodes.

The full transformation provided by this node is a standard SRT,  i.e.:

:math:`result = in * scale * rotate * translation`

.. note:: The :usda:`UsdTransform2d` node transforms texture coordinates, not
          the textures themselves, so to get the effect of moving, resizing, or 
          rotating an image being applied to a surface, one must apply the 
          **inverse** transformation of how you expect the image to move.

**Node Id**: 

* :usda:`UsdTransform2d`

**Inputs (name - type - fallback)**

* **in - float2 - (0.0, 0.0)** 

  Input data to be transformed by this node.For instance, you can connect the
  output of a float2 primvar reader to this input to transform it.

* **rotation - float - (0.0)**

  Counter-clockwise rotation in degrees around the origin.

* **scale - float2 - (1.0, 1.0)** 

  Scale around the origin to be applied to all components of the data.

* **translation - float2 - (0.0, 0.0)** 

  Translation to be applied to all components of the data.

**Outputs**

* **result - float2** 

  Outputs transformed :usda:`float2` values.

.. code-block:: usda

   #usda 1.0
   
   def Shader "UsdTransform2d" (
       doc = """Transform 2d represents a node that can be used to 
       transform 2d data (for instance, texture coordinates).
       The node applies the following transformation : 
       in * scale * rotate + translation"""
       sdrMetadata = {
           token role = "math"
       }
   )
   {
       uniform token info:id = "UsdTransform2d"
   
       float2 inputs:in = (0.0, 0.0) (
           doc = """This input provides the data. It is usually 
                   connected to a UsdPrimvarReader_float2 that 
                   will provide the data."""
       )
       float inputs:rotation = (0.0) (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Counter-clockwise rotation in degrees around the origin to be applied 
           to all components of the data."""
       )
       float2 inputs:scale = (1.0, 1.0) (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Scale around the origin to be applied to all components of the data."""
       )
       float2 inputs:translation = (0.0, 0.0) (
           connectability = "interfaceOnly"
           doc = """Translation to be applied to all components of the data."""
       )
       float2 outputs:result (
           doc = "Outputs transformed float2 values."
       )
   }

USD Sample
==========

Here is an example using the previous nodes.

.. code-block:: usda

   #usda 1.0
   (
      upAxis = "Z"
   )
   
   def Material "mat"
   {
       #
       # Outputs available for the material, they are usually connected to the
       # output of your surface node.
       #
       token outputs:surface.connect      = </mat/pbrMat1.outputs:surface>
       token outputs:displacement.connect = </mat/pbrMat1.outputs:displacement>
   
       #
       # Public Interface Example: This is how you could define a material public interface
       # This is an easy way for tools to quickly detect tweakable parameters
       # inside the material network
       #
       float inputs:ior = 1.9 # See connection from </mat/pbrMat1.inputs:ior> to this attribute
   
       #
       # Parameters only useful for tangent space normal mapping
       # Note : Currently, we only support one tangent frame
       #
       # Details : Name of the primvar in your geom to use for the tangents.
       # Default : "tangents"
       string inputs:frame:tangentsPrimvarName = "tangents"
   
       # Details : Name of the primvar in your geom to use for the binormals
       # Default : "binormals"
       string inputs:frame:binormalsPrimvarName = "binormals"
   
       # Details : Name of the texture coordinate to be use to calculate
       #            the tangent frame. Mikktspace or similar is recommended for
       #            consistency
       # Default : "st"
       string inputs:frame:stPrimvarName = "st"
   
       #
       # Preview surface shader.
       #
       def Shader "pbrMat1"
       {
           # Indicate the type of the node.
           uniform token info:id = "UsdPreviewSurface"
   
           # Outputs available in this shader.
           token outputs:surface
           token outputs:displacement
   
           # Material Inputs
           int inputs:useSpecularWorkflow       = 0
           color3f  inputs:diffuseColor.connect = </mat/baseColorTex.outputs:rgb>
           color3f  inputs:specularColor        = (0, 0, 0)
           color3f  inputs:emissiveColor        = (0, 0, 0)
           float    inputs:displacement         = 0.0
           float    inputs:opacity              = 1.0
           float    inputs:opacityThreshold     = 0.0
           float    inputs:roughness            = 0.01
           float    inputs:metallic.connect     = </mat/metallicTex.outputs:r>
           float    inputs:clearcoat.connect    = </mat/clearcoatTex.outputs:r>
           float    inputs:clearcoatRoughness.connect = </mat/clearcoatTex.outputs:g>
           float    inputs:occlusion.connect    = </mat/PrimvarOcclusion.outputs:result>
           normal3f inputs:normal.connect       = </mat/normalTex.outputs:rgb>
           float    inputs:ior.connect          = </mat.inputs:ior>
       }
   
   
       #
       # Texture nodes bound to the texture coordinate read by the "Primvar" node
       #
       def Shader "baseColorTex"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdUVTexture"
           float4 inputs:fallback = (0, 1, 0, 1)
           asset inputs:file = @mat_baseColor.png@
           float2 inputs:st.connect = </mat/PrimvarSt1.outputs:result>
           token inputs:wrapS = "black"
           token inputs:wrapT = "clamp"
           float3 outputs:rgb
           float outputs:a
       }
   
       def Shader "PrimvarSt1"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdPrimvarReader_float2"
           string inputs:varname = "st1"
           float2 outputs:result
       }
   
       def Shader "metallicTex"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdUVTexture"
           float4 inputs:fallback = (0.3, 0, 0, 1)
           asset inputs:file = @mat_metallic.png@
           float2 inputs:st.connect = </mat/PrimvarSt1.outputs:result>
           float outputs:r
       }
   
       def Shader "clearcoatTex"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdUVTexture"
           float4 inputs:fallback = (.5, .5, .5, .5)
           asset inputs:file = @mat_clearcoat.png@
           float2 inputs:st.connect = </mat/PrimvarSt1.outputs:result>
           float outputs:r
           float outputs:g
       }
   
   
       #
       # Example : Texture using a secondary texture coordinate for UV
       #
       def Shader "normalTex"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdUVTexture"
           float2 inputs:st.connect = </mat/PrimvarSt.outputs:result>
           float4 inputs:scale = (2.0, 2.0, 2.0, 2.0)
           float4 inputs:bias  = (-1.0, -1.0, -1.0, -1.0)
           float3f outputs:rgb
       }
   
       def Shader "PrimvarSt"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdPrimvarReader_float2"
           string inputs:varname.connect = </mat.inputs:frame:stPrimvarName>
           float2 outputs:result
       }
   
   
       #
       # Example : Primvar data in the mesh being used in the material.
       #
       def Shader"PrimvarOcclusion"
       {
           uniform token info:id = "UsdPrimvarReader_float"
           float inputs:fallback = 1.0
           string inputs:varname = "ao"
           float outputs:result
       }
   }
   
   def Mesh "plane1"
   {
       float3[] extent = [ (-0.5, -0.1, -0.5), (0.5, 0.1, 0.5)]
       int[] faceVertexCounts = [4, 4]
       int[] faceVertexIndices = [0, 1, 4, 3, 1, 2, 5, 4]
       normal3f[] normals = [(0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0)]
       point3f[]  points = [(-0.5, 0, 0.5), (0, 0, 0.5), (0.5, 0, 0.5), (-0.5, 0, -0.5), (0, 0, -0.5), (0.5, 0, -0.5)]
       float[] primvars:ao = [0, 0.5, 1, 1, 0.1, 1] (
           interpolation = "vertex"
       )
       int[] primvars:ao:indices = [0, 1, 4, 3, 2, 5]
   
       texCoord2f[] primvars:st = [(0, 0), (0.5, 0), (0.5, 1), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)] (
           interpolation = "vertex"
       )
       int[] primvars:st:indices = [0, 1, 4, 3, 2, 5]
       texCoord2f[] primvars:st1 = [(0, 0), (0.5, 0), (0.5, 1), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)] (
           interpolation = "vertex"
       )
       int[] primvars:st1:indices = [0, 1, 4, 3, 2, 5]
       uniform token subdivisionScheme = "none"
   
       rel material:binding = </mat>
   }

Other Notes
===========

Texture Coordinate Orientation in USD
#####################################

In pursuit of the goal of making USD a reliable and simple (as possible)
standard of interchange, we require that all texture coordinates in USD adhere
to the same coordinate system, so that there is never any question of whether
texture coordinates need to be "flipped" as they are consumed by our
:ref:`Texture Reader node<spec_usdpreviewsurface:texture reader>` . The coordinate
system we stipulate follows the cartesian coordinate system: if we are viewing,
on the same monitor, an axis-aligned quadrilateral and a texture image, the
lower left-hand corner of the quadrilateral should be the (0, 0) *st*
coordinate, which maps to the lower left-hand corner of the image as the (0, 0)
*uv* coordinate. More specifically, for the four vertices of a quadrilateral, in
order, the *st* coordinates should be [ (0, 0), (1, 0), (1, 1), (0, 1) ].

This mapping is shared by MaterialX and MDL, though unfortunately not glTf, so
when converting between glTf and USD, texture coordinates must be "t flipped"
(i.e. :math:`tFinal = 1.0 - t`) before being consumed by the texture reader.

As an implementation detail, because most image/texture reading packages
(including OpenImageIO) consider the *upper-left* corner of an image to be uv
(0, 0), the image-reader abstraction in USD that serves as an interface to OIIO
and other image readers **flips the layout of the image bottom-to-top** before
making it available to shading consumers.

Roughness vs Glossiness
#######################

There is no widespread agreement on whether artists should author roughness or
glossiness. Roughness is *usually* used in the metalness workflow, however
`Unity exposes glossiness (as "Smoothness") in both its metallic and specular
workflows
<https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/StandardShaderMetallicVsSpecular.html>`_ , and
Substance Painter provides Metal/Roughness and Specular/Glossiness preview
surfaces, while we have chosen to expose roughness in :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface`
for both metalness and specular. Therefore, when using :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface`
as a transport between systems that may not agree, we must be sensitive of
textures and defaults generated for glossiness vs roughness.

Happily, the conversion between the two is easy: :math:`roughness = 1 -
glossiness`. Even more happily, the *scale* and *bias* inputs on
:usda:`UsdUVTexture` allow us to encode this conversion efficiently, without
need for either extra nodes, or modifying textures. If you have a texture that
was produced as an input for glossiness, then simply set:

    * scale = -1.0

    * bias = 1.0

on the :usda:`UsdUVTexture` used to feed the texture to a
:usda:`UsdPreviewSurface`'s *roughness* input (and/or apply the same inversion
to any authored default value).

Changes, by Version
===================

Version 2.0 - Initial Public Specification
##########################################

`USD Preview Surface Proposal Version 2.0 <https://openusd.org/files/UsdPreviewSurfaceProposal_v2_0.pdf>`_

Version 2.2 - Before Type Changes
#################################

From version 2.0...

    * Adds :ref:`spec_usdpreviewsurface:transform2d`

    * Adds :ref:`opacityThreshold <addopacitythreshold>`
      and clarification of *opacity* behavior for UsdPreviewSurface

`USD Preview Surface Proposal Version 2.2 <https://openusd.org/files/UsdPreviewSurfaceProposal_v_2_2.pdf>`_

Version 2.3
###########

From version 2.2...

    * :ref:`Changes type of UsdPrimvarReader. varname input from token to string
      <varnamefromtokentostring>`. Henceforth, :usda:`token` is reserved for
      "enum-like" inputs that present a fixed set of choices, and as the
      placeholder type for :usda:`struct` user-types. Note that interface inputs
      on Materials, like :usda:`inputs:frame:st` in the examples in this
      document, should also now be string valued.

    * :ref:`Eliminates UsdUVTexture.rgba output <eliminatergba>`. Four channel
      colors are not well-supported in common shading systems, and the Usd nodes
      themselves have no use for four channel colors, preferring separate *rgb*
      and *a* outputs, which still exist.

    * :ref:`Changes calculation of F0 for metallic materials
      <metalnessworkflowcalc>` to better match
      expectations of similar artist-friendly shading models. When
      :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface.metallic` is 1, F0 and F90 reflectivity will
      both be equal to :usda:`diffuseColor`.

    * :ref:`Creates a new input on UsdUvTexture called sourceColorSpace
      <addsourcecolorspace>` with possible token values *raw* , *sRGB* , and
      *auto* (with *auto* as default value). Users should now have better
      control of what color space with which a texture is read.

    * :ref:`Adds note elaborating on expected input behavior in regards to
      pre-multiplied alpha for UsdPreviewSurface <straightalphapreviewsurface>`.
      All color inputs to the :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface` are straight alpha (no
      pre-multiplication). Recommendations specific to USD's high performance
      rasterizing renderer, Storm, are included.

    * :ref:`Clarifies behavior of UsdPreviewSurface. opacityThreshold input
      <addopacitythreshold>`. A non-zero
      :usda:`UsdPreviewSurface.opacityThreshold` acts as a binary cutoff for
      determining at what :usda:`opacity` values the surface will be rendered.

Version 2.4 - Current Head
##########################

From version 2.3...

    * :ref:`Updates description of UsdPreviewSurface. ior input.<updateior>`
      Clarifies that the :usda:`ior` input can also be used in the calculation
      of specular components, including the clearcoat when
      :math:`UsdPreviewSurface.clearcoat > 0`.
