% WARNING: THIS FILE IS GENERATED BY genSchemaDocs. DO NOT EDIT.
% Generated: 04:05PM on May 16, 2024


(OpenVDBAsset)=
# OpenVDBAsset

A Field representing an OpenVDB volume grid. See
the [OpenVDB website](https://www.openvdb.org/documentation/doxygen/index.html)
for more information on OpenVDB.

An example OpenVDBAsset referencing a single density field in a .vdb file:

```{code-block} usda
def OpenVDBAsset "densityVDB"
{
    token fieldDataType = "float"
    int fieldIndex.timeSamples = {
        10: 0,
    }
    token fieldName = "density"
    asset filePath.timeSamples = {
        10: @/vdb_test_data/grids.vdb@,
    }
}

```

The FieldAsset `filePath` attribute must specify a file in the OpenVDB (.vdb) 
format on disk.

```{contents}
:depth: 2
:local:
:backlinks: none
```

(OpenVDBAsset_properties)=

## Properties

(OpenVDBAsset_fieldClass)=

### fieldClass

**USD type**: `token`

Represents the class of an indivdual grid.
This attribute is optional.

This is a mapping to OpenVDB's openvdb::GridClass where the values are 
`GRID_LEVEL_SET`, `GRID_FOG_VOLUME`, `GRID_STAGGERED`, and `GRID_UNKNOWN`.


(OpenVDBAsset_inheritedproperties_FieldAsset)=

## Inherited Properties ({ref}`FieldAsset`)

(OpenVDBAsset_fieldDataType)=

### fieldDataType

**USD type**: `token`

The data type of a field, such as "float".

Use this attribute to tell consumers more about the field without requiring the 
consumer access the asset file directly. The list of allowed tokens reflects the 
available choices for OpenVDB volumes. 


(OpenVDBAsset_fieldIndex)=

### fieldIndex

**USD type**: `int`

The index of a field within a FieldAsset asset
file. This attribute is optional.

An asset file can contain multiple fields with the same name. This optional 
attribute is an index used to disambiguate between multiple fields with the same 
name. For example, in an OpenVDB file asset, there might be two Grids named 
"density". A `fieldIndex` of 0 would specify that this Field refers to the first 
"density" Grid.


(OpenVDBAsset_fieldName)=

### fieldName

**USD type**: `token`

Represents the name of an individual field within
a FieldAsset asset file. 

A FieldAsset file asset may contain multiple fields in a single asset file. This 
attribute specifies the name of field **within** the asset file. For example, an 
OpenVDB file asset might have multiple named Grids, such as "density", 
"temperature", etc. `fieldName` would specify one of the named Grids in the 
OpenVDB file asset.

Note that a Volume also provides a way to specify the "name" for a field, via 
the field relationship. This name is not associated with asset data and is used 
by the Volume for organizing fields for the rendering pipeline. See
{ref}`usdVol_understanding_fieldname` for more details on how the field's 
relationship name differs from `fieldName`.


(OpenVDBAsset_filePath)=

### filePath

**USD type**: `asset`

An asset path attribute that points to a file on disk.

The asset pointed to by filePath must be a file type that the FieldAsset-derived
schema supports. For example, for OpenVDBAsset, the file type must be an 
OpenVDB (.vdb) file. For Field3DAsset, the file type must be a Field3D (.f3d)
file.

This attribute's value can be animated over time, as most
volume asset formats represent just a single timeSample of
a volume. However, it does not, at this time, support
any pattern substitutions like "$F". 

See {ref}`usdVol_using_animated_field_data` for an example of using `filePath`
to refer to animated volumetric data.


(OpenVDBAsset_vectorDataRoleHint)=

### vectorDataRoleHint

**USD type**: `token`

**Fallback value**: `None`

Specifies the role of a vector valued field,
such as "Color". This can drive the data type in which fields are made available 
in a renderer or whether the vector values are to be transformed. This attribute 
is optional.

This token can drive the data type in which fields are made available in a 
renderer or whether the vector values are to be transformed. Allowed tokens 
include `None`, `Point`, `Normal`, `Vector`, and `Color`.


(OpenVDBAsset_inheritedproperties_Xformable)=

## Inherited Properties ({ref}`Xformable`)

(OpenVDBAsset_xformOpOrder)=

### xformOpOrder

**USD type**: `token[]`



(OpenVDBAsset_inheritedproperties_Imageable)=

## Inherited Properties ({ref}`Imageable`)

(OpenVDBAsset_proxyPrim)=

### proxyPrim

**USD type**: `rel` (relationship)



(OpenVDBAsset_purpose)=

### purpose

**USD type**: `token`

**Fallback value**: `default`



(OpenVDBAsset_visibility)=

### visibility

**USD type**: `token`

**Fallback value**: `inherited`


